

===== PAGE 36 =====
add some uncertainty to the exact reappearance.  In a
disciple game the points required to call the dead god are
increased by 50%.
Example:  The pretender of Vanarus has died.  Because he
had Nature 3 when he died, he has an 80% chance of losing
one skill level in one magic path (not necessarily Nature) and
if he does not, he will lose one point of dominion strength. 
On the following turn, Vanarus assigns three level 1 priests
and a level 2 priest to Call God.  If no other priests are
assigned to this, it will take about ten turns for the
pretender of Vanarus to return.
The nations Ur and Uruk have a special property which
allows their god to be called back from the dead without
losing any magic levels or dominion strength.
Automatic Bless Effects
All pretenders and disciples are auto-blessed within their
own dominion.  They are not blessed at any other time. 
Sacred units on the battlefield with their pretender are
auto-blessed as well if the battle is in a friendly dominion.
Units
The world of Dominions 6 was populated by all manner of
creatures.  These ranged from weak, lightly armed militia to
giant monsters of unspeakable horror and magnitude.  In
between there were bards, mages, bandits, dragons, and
many others.
In the game, units can be summoned by spells, recruited
from the countryside, or may appear at your gates on their
own.  Each province has its own recruitable units.  Some
units may require a structure such as a temple or laboratory
before they can be recruited.  Some can only be recruited in
a province with a particular magic site.
Each nation has a unique set of units that can only be
accessed in provinces with a friendly fort.  At the start of the
game, this will be the starting fort in a nation’s home
province.  Later, as you build new fortresses, you’ll be able to
recruit those units in those provinces, too, although some
units are recruitable only in your capital, from a magic site
located there.
There is a basic distinction between units and commanders:
units are the troops that make up your squads, while
commanders are the individuals who either lead these
squads or perform other tasks like research or item crafting. 
Some attributes are exclusive to commanders, like
leadership and the ability to change equipment inventory or
carry gems.  The list below summarizes all of these
attributes.
You can get further information about an ability simply by
clicking on it.  This will bring up a window which shows how
this value has been modified.  For example, a unit may have a
base morale value of 12, but due to experience (+1) and
friendly dominion (+1) the modified value is 14.  Clicking on
the attribute will show its modifications.
Some attributes show further attributes
37
From the tomes of the lore of Dominions
Ermor was once a great empire that had conquered much of the known world.  The realm crumbled as the great mages of the Empire 
studied dark magic under the Sauromancers of C’tis.  Unaware of the dangers of dark sorcery, priests performed unholy rites in the 
capital city of Eldregate.  But there were voices who demanded that the foul practices stop.  Theurgs and Thaumaturgs foresaw the 
cataclysm and advised generals, governors, and consuls to revolt.  When the Apostate Emperor marched on Ermor itself, the Augurs and 
Bishops of the Empire were forced to act in concert.  In one cataclysmic event, Death was let loose and the empire was shattered.  The 
Cataclysm attracted attention from an earlier God, a dark and hungry God.  The vast power of this Awakening God erased the 
boundaries between the land of the living and the land of the dead.  Ermor is now a cursed land of ashes and darkness where nothing 
grows.  The bones of long-dead inhabitants reassemble to form legions of undead under the leadership of the cursed priests of the old 
Ermorian faith.  Undead legions march forth to conquer a world once theirs.  The Ermorian Dominion reanimates the dead without the 
aid of unholy priests.  It also destroys the land, turning crops and forests into ashes, and people and livestock into bones.  The Pretender 
God of Ermor will also be able to sense where any corpses are in provinces under his Dominion.

===== PAGE 37 =====
Basic attributes
Hit Points
Everyone knows what this is.
Size
Size determines how many units can be in a single square on
the battlefield (a maximum of 10 points in a single square).  It
also determines how many supplies a unit needs each turn.
Units consume size minus 2 supplies each month. Small units
(size 1-2) consume ½ supply each month and size 0 units do not
consume any supplies. Animals have their supply usage halved.
For cavalry units both the rider and the mount will consume
supplies.
Strength
This determines how much damage a unit does when it
successfully strikes a target. Strength is also used to break free
from certain effects like entanglement.
Attack
This determines the unit’s chances of successfully striking a
target with melee weapons.
Defense
This determines the unit’s chances of avoiding a strike by melee
weapons.
Protection
This is the unit’s armor rating.  It can be different on different
parts of the body, depending on equipment worn or simply the
nature of the creature’s hide.  These separate values will be
shown when you click on Protection.
Morale
This measures a unit’s likelihood of not running away from
battle.
Magic Resistance
Think of this as Defense, only against magic.  Not all spells have
to penetrate Magic Resistance, though.
Precision
This is how accurate a unit is, either with missiles or with magic.
Encumbrance
A unit will incur Fatigue equal to its Encumbrance on each turn
it attacks.  Moving —by itself— does not incur this.
Map Move
This determines how far a unit can move on the world map,
subject to the movement costs listed under Movement on page
47.
Combat Speed
This determines how far the unit can move in combat.
Fatigue
A unit’s Fatigue causes it to be more susceptible to critical
strikes.  Once a unit reaches 100 fatigue, it becomes
unconscious and is unable to attack or defend.  A unit at 200
fatigue starts taking regular hit point damage instead of fatigue
damage from additional fatigue.
Age
The first number is the unit’s age in years.  The number in
parentheses is the age at which the unit will start suffering
penalties and become susceptible to afflictions due to old age. 
This attribute is displayed when you click on Fatigue.  The age
when you start suffering penalties is referred to as max age.  It
is modified by the following (in order of priority):
* undead creatures have their max age increased by 50% per
point of Death magic
* inanimate creatures have their max age increased by 50% per
point of Earth magic
* demons have their max age increased by 50% per point of
Blood magic
* everyone else has his or her max age increased by 50% per
point of Nature magic
* creatures whose max age could be modified by Nature have it
reduced 5% per point of Fire magic (burn bright, burn fast)
There are three kinds of Leadership, and apply to
Commanders only.
Leadership
This is the number of units a commander can lead.
Undead Leadership
Like leadership, but for undead beings.  Mages can lead 50
undead beings per level of Death magic skill and 10 per level of
Blood magic skill he or she has.
Magical leadership
As above, but for magical beings.  For mages this is determined
by indirect magic bonuses (see Indirect Magic chart – not all
paths confer the same benefits).
Units also may have special abilities.  Some of these are
summarized below.
Special abilities
Units in Dominions 6 can have a wide variety of special
abilities.  In fact, there are about 500 special abilities in the
game.  Each modifies the unit’s attributes or capabilities in
some way.  A mouse-over or right-click on the ability in the
stats screen will give an explanation of what it does.  Some
of these attributes bear further explanation, which appear
38

===== PAGE 38 =====
below.
Ambidextrous
This ability reduces the attack penalty for wielding two or more
weapons by an amount equal to the Ambidextrous level. It does
not remove the 1 point of encumbrance penalty per extra
weapon wielded.
Berserker
A unit with this ability goes berserk when wounded if it passes
a morale check vs. 12.  Berserk units fight until dead – they do
not rout.  A unit with +Berserk ability gets that number as a
bonus to its berserk attributes.  A berserk unit that falls
unconscious loses its berserker state (but can go berserk again
if wounded after regaining consciousness).
Ethereal
Very difficult to hit with non-magical weapons.  75% of such
strikes will miss. When storming a fort ethereal units can pass
through the walls and attack defenders on the other side.
Glamour
These units gain Mirror Image in combat, and are undetectable
in friendly provinces.
Recuperation
This unit can heal its battle afflictions over time, unless it has
the Old Age icon.
Regeneration
Regenerative creatures heal some of their lost HP after every
combat round and have a reduced risk of getting permanent
afflictions from getting wounded in battle.  Regeneration does
not affect inanimate beings like golems and longdead.  There
are two more varieties of regeneration that are called
Reconstruction and Reforming Flesh.  Reconstruction only
works on inanimate beings and nothing else.  Reforming Flesh
works on all undead beings, but not on anything else.
Sailing
Can cross (but not remain in) water provinces when moving.
Awe
Units with Awe force enemies to take a morale check against
10 + Awe in order to be able to attack them.  Thus, a unit with
Awe +4 would force attackers to pass a morale check against
14, or be awestruck and unable to attack the awe-inspiring
monster on that combat round.  There is a special kind of Awe
called Sun Awe which does not work underground, or when it is
dark.
Fear
Units in a monster’s Fear area of effect get their morale
temporarily lowered and their entire squad must take a morale
check against the monster’s Fear, or rout.  The basic Fear effect
requires a check against 10.  Unlike Awe, the bonus to Fear
indicates the additional area of effect, not the Fear strength.  So
a Fear +4 monster has normal Fear that radiates to 4 additional
squares.  The Fear strength itself is increased for every full +5
Fear, so a Fear +10 unit would radiate to ten additional
squares, and force a morale check against 12.  The base area of
effect (Fear +0) is 6 squares.
Heat
Units with this ability radiate heat into adjacent squares.  You
will see this as little black smoke.  This creates level 1 or 2 heat
clouds in the vicinity.  The default size of a heat aura is 3
squares and is increased by Heat scales and reduced by Cold
scales.  Some monsters may have a greater heat aura, which has
a larger area of effect.  Also a huge number of units with heat
aura will cause the clouds to spread further, but the effect on a
single nearby enemy unit will still be the same.
Chill
This is exactly the same as Heat, except that it creates frost
clouds.  It looks like bluish-white smoke.  The default size of a
chill aura is 3 squares and is increased by Cold scales and
reduced by Heat scales.
Poison cloud
This creates level 1 or 2 poison clouds in the vicinity.  These
clouds look like green smoke.
Stun
Stun prevents a unit from taking any action for about one
round.
Invisibility
Units that are invisible cannot be seen.  You suffer a -9 penalty
to Attack when attacking a unit you cannot see in melee.  In
order to see invisible units you must have the ability Spirit
Sight.  Units that are blind anyway are not further penalized
when attacking invisible enemies.
Petrification
This is the Medusa's special ability.  Anyone attacking her is
petrified if the attacker fails a magic resistance roll.  After
about 3-6 rounds, the petrification is lost.  If the unit passes a
magic resistance check upon losing its petrification, it returns
to normal.  If it does not, it dies.
39

===== PAGE 39 =====
Standard
The standard ability increases the morale of the entire squad it
is in. Only the best standard for every squad will have a morale
increasing effect.
Horror Marking
A horror mark is a condition which can lead to dire results.  A
horror mark will result in a small chance each month that a unit
will be attacked by a horror.  A unit can be horror-marked more
than once which will increase this chance, but there is no way of
knowing how bad the mark is.  Certain spells will cause a
horror-marked unit to be attacked.  In battle Horrors always
attack a horror-marked unit first. Stronger horror marks also
attract stronger horrors.
Trample
Trample is exactly what it sounds like – a large unit runs over a
smaller one.  Smush!  A trampling unit displaces all of the units
in the square it enters to an adjacent square.  These units have
to take a Defense – (fatigue / 10) check against 3d6.  If they fail
this check, they take 7 + Size trample damage.  This is an
armor-piercing attack, so Protection is halved.  Ethereal
tramplers have their trample damage halved. A trampled unit
will always take at least one point of damage, regardless of
Protection.  A unit which successfully passes the defense check
is still displaced, but just takes one point of damage, total.
Swallow
Some monsters are able to swallow the target of a successful
trampling attack.  The swallowed monsters are removed from
the battlefield until the swallowing monster is killed.  Some
monsters are able to digest swallowed targets, which does
damage to the swallowed target each turn, and some monsters
can even incorporate the swallowed target into their own
bodies and get extra hit points from the damage they do to
swallowed creatures. Being swallowed prevents many life
saving abilities and spells (e.g. Regeneration and Phoenix Pyre)
from working and usually means certain death unless the
swallower is killed swiftly.
Unit classes
Some special ability divide units into classes that have
different abilities associated with them, and often
leadership requirements that restrict who can lead them.
Magic being
These units require a mage to lead them.  They rout if left
without magical leadership.
Mindless
Mindless units have 50 morale and will never rout as long they
their is a suitable commander present to lead them.  if left
without a suitable commander they will suffer mindless
dissolution on the battlefield .  Mindless units cannot be in the
same squad as non-mindless units.
Undead
Undead units are subject to banishment.  Undead units require
undead leadership, which is generally conferred by skill in
Death magic (or being an undead commander).  Zombies aren’t
going to take orders from just anybody.  A squad that mixes
undead and non-undead gets a -1 morale penalty, for obvious
reasons.  Undead are also immune to affliction healing effects
and will not suffer any adverse effects by being diseased.  They
rout if left without undead leadership.
Demon
Demons are subject to banishment.  Demons require undead
leadership, just like undeads. Demons are also immune to
disease.  They rout if left without undead leadership.
Lifeless
Lifeless beings are immune to disease, regeneration, life drain
and affliction healing effects.  Lifeless beings are also immune
to many combat spells, but they can heal themselves with life
draining attacks like everyone else.
Spiritform
Beings with spiritform cannot be affected by transformation
types spells like ironskin, skeletal body and polymorph. They
are also immune to both diseases and affliction healing effects.
Animal
Animals can be led by normal commanders, just like humans. 
Animals only consume half as many supplies as a humanoid of
the same size.  Animals without arms like apes are worse at
both sieging and defending forts (half strength for this
purpose), on the other hand most animals compensate by being
stronger than humans.
Additional abilities
There are many other unit attributes, which you can get
information on by right-clicking on or mousing over the
effect in the unit’s stat window.  An ability granted by a
magic item, such as Regeneration or Fire Resistance, will be
listed with the other abilities, and information about it can
be found in the same way.
You can see a (nearly) full list of abilities in the Modding
40

===== PAGE 56 =====
52. Kill lone units
Lone units (non-commanders) in enemy provinces are killed.  If
there are units without commanders inside enemy territory
they will be killed here to prevent them from making any
pointless attacks.
53. Reclaim provinces
If a fort does not own the province it is in and it is not under
siege, it will take ownership of the province.  This can happen in
team games where the province and the fort might have
different owners from the same team.  This step is resolved in
favor of the owner of the fort.
54. Conscription
Province Defence is raised to a minimum of one and Dominion
and Commander effects to raise the PD take effect.
55. Scouting
New scouting reports are generated for each player.
56. Elimination
Players without any provinces or dominion are eliminated from
the game.
57. Victory
If a victory condition is fulfilled, the game declares a winner and
ends.
58. Update stats
Hall of Fame and scoregraphs are updated.
59. Heroic abilities
Units gain and improve heroic abilities.
60. Reform Immortals
Immortals that are due to return will reform their bodies here.
61. Reduce PD
Province defense is reduced if the population cannot support
the current level.  At least 10 population is required for each
point of province defense.
62. Yearning artifacts
If any new artifacts become yearning, it will happen now.
63. Aftermath
The game validates orders and items, changes shapes if
necessary, etc.
Combat
Combat is what happens when two discovered enemy forces
occupy the same location on the map.  If one force or both
forces are undiscovered, no combat will occur.  Thus, a
stealthy force may move right through an enemy and not
trigger combat.  Thus, both forces are not discovered.  Two
forces which are both discovered may occupy the same
province, but one might be in a fortress which has not yet
been breached.  In this case, the forces are in different
locations (one in the fort, the other besieging in the
province).  When one army is in a fort and one army
besieges, the province is owned by the besieging player and
the fort is owned by the besieged. This situation is known as
partial ownership of the province. When the same player
owns both fort and province, the situation is known as full
ownership. Full and partial ownership of a province have
certain effects in-game (e.g. some events cannot happen in a
partially owned province because they require full
ownership as a precondition to happening).
Once combat occurs, units move according to their tactical
movement allowance on a grid placed over the map.  You
can toggle this grid by hitting the [g] key or the [w] key.
Players can find battles overwhelming.  This can easily
happen if you try to follow every swing of every weapon.  It's
not necessary.
It is important to understand that battles in Dominions are
not fought to the death.  They are fought until one side loses
its nerve and routs.  As will be explained in the section to
follow, routing is based on losses and morale.  This allows
small units of elite troops to hold off masses of undisciplined
barbarians.
Here are some basic points to understand about combat. 
Details will be discussed later on in this section.
57
From the tomes of the lore of Dominions
Raterik is a strange and secretive knight.  As a youth, he befriended a black unicorn and the magical steed gave the peasant boy the 
opportunity to join the Black Order.  Several of the older members of the Order complained about the peasant, but so far he has not 
failed in his tasks.  Raterik has proven himself a resourceful and able commander. 
 Hildegard was the only child of the late Hochmeister of the Black Order.  Her father taught her how to fight and wanted her to join the 
Order, but she was a strong-willed woman who didn’t like the Order’s strict hierarchical organization.  She decided to become a 
freelance warrior and as such, she has become known and respected.  During her more adventurous years, Hildegard befriended a 
unicorn who still accompanies her.

===== PAGE 57 =====
* Units are deployed on the battlefield corresponding to the
Army Setup screen under Position squads.
* The attacker is on the left, the defender on the right.
* Units move across the battlefield in accordance with the
instructions in <set battle orders>
* When units move adjacent to an enemy, they halt due to a
"zone of control"
* Once units are adjacent, they attack each other every turn.
* The chance of scoring a hit in melee depends on the difference
between attack and defense values
* The chance of scoring a hit with missile weapons depends on
the number of units in square the missile hits, and how good the
target's shield is (if it has one).
* The chance of doing damage after scoring a hit depends on the
attacker's strength and weapon damage versus the defender's
protection.
* Magic in combat works a lot like missile weapons (see page
65)
* Morale is calculated for each squad.  A squad takes a morale
check when it suffers enough casualties.
* A squad routs when it fails a morale check.
* Battles are fought until one side routs off the map:  the other
side is said to have won the battle
* Troops will rout when all of their commanders have been killed
or routed. The entire army will rout when their side loses 75%
of its total hit points
So if you kill or rout all of an army's commanders, the whole
army will rout.  It does not matter how big it is.  The biggest
army in the universe (of Dominions) will rout if it is led by a
single commander, and he is killed or routed.
(For this reason, there is no "attack commanders" order. 
You will have to figure out how best to do this yourself!)
Battles View
When you get a report on a battle, you can click on the
message “There was a battle in <province name>”. This gives
you the battle summary with the casualty lists. Clicking the
“View battle” text will take you into the battle replay.
The battles in Dominions are actually very detailed tactical
resolutions fought at the level of the individual fighters,
mages, and priests.  Each unit has its own equipment and
abilities.  They move and fight according to these
parameters, according to the battle sequence.  When you
watch the battle replay, you can see what happened with
various degrees of detail.  There is a box in the upper left
which describes the action.  You can change the level of
detail in this box by hitting the number keys: [1] for least
detail, [2-3] for more detail, and [4] for most detail.
Other useful keys when viewing battles are:
Arrow for scrolling around the map
PageUp / for adjusting the camera height
PageDown
Space for pausing the action
c for toggling colored squares for the teams
g for toggling grid
w for toggling the wire frame grid (battlefield
graphics disappear from view)
q to quit out of the battle replay
f speed up battle replay to fast speed
t speed up battle replay to fastest speed
s switch battle replay back to normal speed
v while viewing a unit, this key will show its
combat log
z slow motion replay (useful when using greatest
amount of detail to see what happens and
when)
F1 Obtain a list of all the units
F2 View current weather and dominion scales
? View the available hotkeys
1 / 2 / 3 / 4 adjusts the level of detail in the battle log
(upper left text box describing the battle action)
+ - scroll the battle log
Battle sequence
When combat is started, the attacker is placed on the left
side of the screen and the defender on the right.  All units
are placed on the battlefield according to their setup.  They
will then proceed to follow whatever orders they have been
given (attack, cast spells) until they rout or the battle ends.
Army Setup
Units in Dominions 6 are placed into squads, which are
under the leadership of a commander.  A single commander
can lead up to five squads.
The total number of units a commander can lead is
designated by the Leadership rating found in the unit
abilities.  Clicking on this rating gives further details of the
commander's leadership limits, such as how many magical
beings or undead may be led.  This is important, as not all
commanders have the skill to give orders to magic monsters.
58

===== PAGE 58 =====
And undead and demons don't take orders from just
anybody either.
Squad limits related to leadership values
* Leadership 10: automatic -1 to morale for a single squad. An
additional -1 to all squads for every squad beyond the first (so
five squads = -1 base penalty and -4 for four extra squads = -5).
* Leadership 50: No morale penalty if leading one or two squads.
-1 penalty for every additional sq.
* Leadership 100: +1 morale for all squads if three or fewer. -1
penalty to morale for every squad above three.
* Leadership 150: +2 morale for up to 4 squads, -1 penalty to all
if fifth squad added.
* Leadership 200: +3 morale for all five squads.
The morale effects of leadership rating are based on the
base leadership rating of the commander.  Commanders
gain more leadership with experience, so a highly
experienced commander with a base leadership of 50 might
be able to lead up to 175 units or more, but the morale
bonuses still stay the same.
Experience level Leadership bonus Poor leaders (ldr 10)
1 +25 +5
2 +50 +10
3 +50 +10
4 +50 +10
5 +50 +10
Other effects on morale:
* Mixing undisciplined units with normal makes entire squad
undisciplined and hits them with -1 morale
* Mixing undead with living gets a morale penalty of -1
* Mixing demons with normal units gets a morale penalty of -1
Each unit is placed on the map in a grid square.  A single grid
square can hold a total of ten size points of units.  For
human-sized units (size 3), this means three units can fit in a
grid square.
Unassigned units (those in the garrison box at the top of the
Army Setup screen) are formed into one large squad.  They
begin at the center of their side's army.
Formations
Formations are the patterns used to deploy units of a squad
onto the map.  There are five types of formations, some of
which can only be used by good leaders.
Box
A box formation deploys your units in as close to a square as
possible.  For example, a squad of 36 Infantry of Ulm (size 3)
deployed in a box formation would be placed with four squares
frontage and three squares deep, yielding 12 squares of three
units each.
Line
A line formation deploys your units in a straight line facing the
enemy.  This formation is only available to good commanders.
Double line
A double line is the same as a line except half the units are
placed in a rank immediately behind the first line.  This
formation is only available to good commanders.
Sparse line
A sparse line formation is identical to a line, except that an
empty square is inserted between each square of units.  This
doubles the length of the line.  It carries a -1 penalty to the
squad's morale.  This formation is only available to good
commanders.
Skirmish
Skirmish formation forms a box-like checkerboard formation
which separates each square of units from its neighbors with an
empty square in four directions, as above.  It has a -1 penalty to
morale.
Undisciplined squads automatically use the skirmish
formation and cannot use any other.  Adding an
undisciplined unit to a squad makes the whole squad
undisciplined.
The ability Tight Rein negates the undisciplined trait of a
commander's units, enabling other formations as well as
giving specific orders to undisciplined units.
The Skirmisher ability negates the -1 morale penalty when
59
From the tomes of the lore of Dominions
Bandar Log is a very hierarchical society.  Markatas are the smallest of the monkey people and their intellect is barely above that of 
simple beasts.  Markatas are small, noisy, and annoying, especially when met in large numbers.  If alone, they can be used as scouts, but 
when in greater numbers, they quickly become bored and start to make noise and play with each other.  They are generally despised by 
the larger monkeys and apes.  They are sometimes given small bows.  This pleases them no end, but they still are not very useful soldiers.

===== PAGE 59 =====
the unit is deployed in a skirmish or sparse line formation.
The ability Formation Fighter allows you to fit more units in
a square.
Battlefield movement
Each unit in combat has combat speed.  A move of one
square on the battlefield costs roughly one point of combat
speed, unless it is diagonal in which case it costs 50% more.
When units move adjacent to an enemy, they become locked
in a “zone of control” which remains as long as the enemy
persists. However, fleeing units do not care about zone of
controls and just run regardless of danger and nearby
enemies.
Usually there can only be 10 size points in a single square
and a unit is unable to enter a square if that results in the
square being too full. However, giants or other monsters
that are considerably larger than the other units will be able
to enter the square by displacing the smaller units. The large
unit must be at least 3 size points larger than any displaced
unit and it will cost one extra point of combat speed.
Note that trampling units will never try to displace anyone
as long as they are not routing, as that would cause damage
to the friendly units.
Each unit moves individually, and has a cooldown at the end
of each action.  After a unit moves one step or strikes, it
must cool down a while before it can perform its next action.
A long cooldown is one round (after a strike) and a short
cooldown comes after a move.  There is some small amount
of randomness to this cooldown value, but when moving it is
mostly determined by the unit’s combat move, so faster
units will wait a shorter time before taking the next action. 
If two units are adjacent, the unit that finishes its cooldown
first will get to strike next.
Melee combat
Melee combat is the act of one combatant (soldier, priest,
monster, or divine being) physically striking another
combatant in some way.  At its heart, it is very simple.
The attacker makes an attack roll.  The defender makes a
defense roll.  These are compared.  If the attack roll (with
modifiers) is greater than the defense roll, it hits.  If not, it
misses.
The attack and defense rolls are modified by a random
number (which is added) and a fatigue penalty (which is
subtracted).
Attack roll: attacker's Attack attribute + DRN - Fatigue penalty
Defense roll: defender's Defense value + DRN - Fatigue penalty
Once a hit is scored, a similar calculation is done to
determine how much damage is done.  This involves the
attacker's damage roll minus the defender's protection roll.
Damage roll: attacker's Strength attribute + weapon Damage
attribute + DRN
Protection defender's Protection attribute + DRN (+ shield
roll: Protection if it is a "shield hit")
If the defender has a shield, the hit is a shield hit unless the
attack beats the combined value of the target's defense and
the shield's Parry value plus the random roll.  If a hit is
scored as a shield hit, the shield's Protection is added to the
defender's protection roll.
Example:  A Heavy Infantry unit has a broad sword, chain
mail hauberk, half helmet and shield.  It has a base defense of
10, gets a defense bonus of +1 from the sword, a defense
penalty of -2 from the armor, and a defense penalty from the
shield of -1.  The shield's Parry value is 4.  The actual defense
is 10 +1 -2 -1 = 8.  With the shield's Parry value, the unit's
total defense is 12.
The Heavy Infantry is attacked by a Vanjarl of Vanheim,
which has attack 14.  Neither unit has any fatigue yet.  The
Vanjarl rolls a 6, for a total attack value of 20.  If the Heavy
Infantry rolls a 7 or less, it is a clean hit and the shield offers
no protection.  If the Heavy Infantry rolls an 8 through 11,
the Vanjarl scores a shield hit and the Heavy Infantry can
use its shield's protection value in the damage calculation.  If
the Heavy Infantry rolls a 12 or higher, the Vanjarl misses
entirely.
The Protection value used is the target's listed Protection
value, unless it is a head hit.  In case of a headshot, the
target's helmet Protection value is used instead of the main
Protection value.  However, if it is a shield hit, the shield
Protection is still added.  The blow is assumed to have
glanced off the shield and hit the target in the head.
If the damage roll is greater than the protection roll, the
difference is subtracted from the target's hit points.  If the
protection roll is equal to or greater than the damage roll,
60

===== PAGE 60 =====
there is no effect.
Armor defeating hits
A low protection roll may result in an armor defeating hit
that bypasses 25% of the protection. This in addition to the
protection roll being very low is likely to result in a serious
wound.
Fatigue plays a large role in enabling armor defeating hits
and units that are immobilized or unconscious counts as
having 100 fatigue for this purpose.
* Protection roll of 2 always results in an armor defeating hit
* Protection roll of 3 results in an armor defeating hit against
targets with 50 or more fatigue
* Protection roll of 4 results in an armor defeating hit against
targets with 100 or more fatigue
Note that it is very hard to score an armor defeating hit on
an unfatigued and not immobilized unit.
Shield destruction
Shield hits can damage or destroy the shield.  A shield has a
Resistance, which is the same as its shield protection value,
+5 if the shield is a magic one.  The attack has a Break value,
which is equal to the damage of the attack before any
Protection.  Slashing attacks add 50% to damage when
calculating break value, and blunt attacks add 25%.
If the Break value is >= 3x the Shield Resistance, the shield is
damaged. If the Break value is >= 5x the Shield Resistance,
the shield is broken.
An already-damaged shield which is damaged again has a
25% chance of being broken.
A damaged shield has -20% Protection, a broken shield has
-50% Protection.
A magic shield (a real, equipable one) that is damaged will
repair itself after the battle.  If a magic shield is broken, it
will be permanently destroyed and the commander will
revert to his or her standard shield if he or she had one. 
Damaged or broken mundane shields will be repaired when
they are in a province with enough spare production
resources.
Hit locations
Dominions 6 uses anatomical locations to determine where
an adversary was struck.  An attack has a 50% chance of
striking the adversary in the torso, 20% chance to strike the
arms, 20% chance to strike the legs, and 10% chance to
strike the head.  Certain hits can cause afflictions, such as
losing a limb.  If someone loses a limb, it will be the one
which was hit.  This can be an arm, leg, or head.  Losing your
head is usually instant death, but this is not always true, for
example in the case of undead and certain kinds of
regenerating monsters, or those with multiple heads.  Other
types of afflictions include losing an eye, which can only
happen on a head hit.
In order to score a hit on a certain part of the body, however,
the attacker must be able to reach it.  To score a head hit,
attacker size + weapon length must be equal to target size. 
This requirement is one less to hit the torso and two less to
hit the arms.  Thus a human (size 3) wielding a mace (length
1) could hit a size-7 creature only in the legs!
Some monsters have their heads located lower than their
size would indicate and therefore anyone attacking them
will get a bonus to their reach. Lizards and dragons are very
low and are two steps easier to hit when striking anything
higher than the legs. Most four-footed beings like elephants
and wolves are slightly lower than a humanoid would be and
are one step easier to reach. Their lower stature does not
mean they are more likely to be hit in the head (or any other
hard-to-reach location). It is still only a 10% chance, but
attackers with shorter weapons might be able to reach and
hit them in the head in situations where their size might
otherwise prevent it.
Also, some monsters lack certain hit locations.  For example,
a dragon has no arms and a gelatinous cube has no arms,
legs, or head.
A significantly larger unit that attacks a smaller one will
have an increased chance of hitting its target in the head and
a lower chance of hitting it in the leg (20% head, 10% leg). 
To be considered “significantly larger” it must be 2 sizes
larger (if mounted the mount's size is used).
Weapon types
Melee weapons in Dominions 6 come in three different
types:  slashing, piercing, and blunt.  Each type has different
effects when calculating damage.  These are all calculated
after the Damage vs. Protection calculation above, except
for Piercing weapons which reduce Protection prior to the
calculation.
61

===== PAGE 61 =====
Blunt weapons do 25% more damage when scoring head hits
before the Protection value is deducted.  They score 25%
more damage toward shield destruction.
Slashing weapons do 25% more damage after Protection is
deducted.  They do 50% more damage toward shield
destruction.  If a slashing weapon scores a leg, arm, or head
hit that costs a target greater than or equal to 50% of its hit
points, that body part will be chopped off.  If a head is
chopped off, this will kill the target if it had a head that was
required for it to stay alive. (For example, a hydra does not
fit that description.)
Piercing weapons reduce Protection by 15% prior to any
calculation.  This is the same mechanic as the Armor-
Piercing ability, except that Armor-Piercing reduces
Protection by 50%.  The Armor-Piercing ability stacks with
the piercing weapon type for a total of 65% reduction in
armor.
Two-handed weapons add 125% of Strength to damage.
Underwater effects
Slashing and blunt weapons have an attack penalty equal to
weapon length underwater, while piercing weapons do not.  If a
weapon does both piercing damage as well as another type, the
underwater penalty is halved.  Flails have an additional penalty
of -1.
A weapon may be able to inflict more than one type of
damage.  If so, it has an equal chance of doing each type of
damage, but will only do one of them during that attack.  For
example, the short sword does both slashing and piercing
damage.  It has a 50% chance of doing one of these.  If it does
not do piercing, it will do slashing, but never both.
Note that these weapon types apply to all sorts of weapons,
not just maces, swords, and spears.  A spider's venomous
fangs can do piercing damage, for example.
In addition, weapons may have additional special effects,
such as doing additional fire damage when it hits someone.
Damage is displayed in colored numbers above the unit that
suffered the damage. Pale red is normal damage, dark red is
bleeding, green is poison, etc. This can be very helpful in
determining the effectiveness of your units and tactics.
Harassed
Every time a unit is attacked, it gets a point of harassment
penalty.  Each point of harassment penalty reduces the
unit’s defense by 1.  It is then reduced continuously by a
percentage, so it goes down quickly if it is high and the unit is
no longer being attacked.
For cavalry units only the unit attacked (the rider or the
horse) will be affected. I.e. an attack against the rider will not
give any harassment penalty to the horse.
A weapon with multiple attacks inflicts 1 point of
harassment penalty for each one of its multiple attacks.
Only directed melee attacks will result in harassment
penalty, ranged and AoE attacks do not incur any penalty.
Fatigue
Fatigue is affected by a unit’s encumbrance value.  The more
encumbered it is, the more fatigued it will become during
combat.  Each time it attacks, it gains Fatigue equal to its
current Encumbrance value.  Fatigue affects units as follows.
Defense penalty for fatigue
For each 10 points of fatigue (rounded down) a unit has its
defense reduced by 1.
Attack penalty for fatigue
For each 20 points of fatigue (rounded down) a unit has its
attack reduced by 1.
Unconsciousness
A unit falls unconscious when it reaches 100 fatigue.  Each
turn it is unconscious it regains 5 fatigue until it become
conscious again (i.e. fatigue drops below 100).  A unit with
200 fatigue starts to take hit point damage from exhaustion
instead of fatigue when additional fatigue damage is taken.
Repel
Repel is how Dominions represents the effectiveness of long
weapons, such as halberds, pikes, and the like.  If a unit
attacks an enemy who has a longer weapon than the
attacker, the defender may actually repel the attack and
prevent it from happening.  This occurs as follows:
Any defender that has a longer weapon than the one used by
its attacker makes a repel attack automatically upon being
attacked.  Attack and defense rolls are made.  If the result is
a hit, the attacker must pass a repel morale check or
immediately abort his attack.  If the attacker passes the
repel morale check, he may make his attack, but the
62

===== PAGE 62 =====
defender’s attack then generates damage and protection
rolls.  If damage is inflicted, the attacker takes one point of
damage and continues his attack.
Repel morale check
Attacker morale check: morale + DRN - (weapon length
difference)
Repeller check: 10 + DRN + (the number by which the defender
won the repel attack) / 2
This simulates the defender successfully placing his longer
weapon between himself and the attacker.  All of this occurs
before the attacker’s strike is resolved.  Note that units with
low morale are more likely to be repelled, and thus using
long weapons against low-morale troops is very effective. 
Also, units with claws and bites (weapon length zero) are
easier to repel.
The repelling unit gets a lingering -2 to its Repel roll which is
gradually removed over a short period of time.  So it’s harder
to repel attacks when they come in quick succession, and
easier if they are spaced out in time.
Giant sized units (size 6+) wield longer weapons than normal
humans. The length of their weapons are 1 point longer than
ordinary human weapons. So a giant wielding a mace (length
2 for giants) would be able to repel humans with ordinary
maces.
Multiple attacks
Some units have multiple attacks.  This may be due to
multiple weapons, or just multiple methods of attack like
biting, clawing, or many tentacles.
Multiple attacks can target different units as long as there
are many in reach. Some rare weapons (e.g. flail) have more
than one attack, these attacks always target the same unit
and if he dies on the first attack the second one is wasted.
Multiple weapons
Attackers with multiple weapons have their attack skill
reduced by the sum of their weapon lengths.  Thus, it is much
easier to fight with two daggers than with two swords.  The
Ambidextrous ability reduces this penalty by the amount of
the Ambidextrous skill.  Some weapons are considered
intrinsic to a unit and do not cause multiple weapon
penalties for the attacker. These are called bonus weapons.
For example, some lizardmen of C'tis might have both a
trident and a bite attack. This bite is considered a bonus
weapon because it is not a wielded weapon and it will not
result in any multiple weapon penalty.
Units with multiple wielded weapons also get one point of
extra encumbrance for each weapon after the first.
Melee attack resolution
There are many special abilities that can affect units that are
fighting in melee and the order in which they take effect can
be important. Here is a list of when most abilities take effect
when doing a melee attack.
Determine target
Determine which unit in the square will be the target. This will
be a single unit or mount.
Early strikeback effects
This is certain longer range defensive abilities of the defender,
e.g. Awe and the Gorgon's petrifying gaze. If the attacker ends
up immobilized for any reason the attack is aborted now.
Repel
Check for repel and abort the attack if it is repelled.
Strikeback effect
This is effects like Slimer, Sight Vengeance, Horror Mark
Attacker and many others. If the attacker ends up immobilized
for any reason the attack is aborted now.
Attack and Defence rolls
The attacker rolls his attack value and the defender his defence
value. If the attack missed completely it is aborted.
Damage and Protection rolls
Rolls for damage and protection are rolled now. Protection
from shields will be added if the previous step indicated a shield
hit.
Defensive abilities
Here abilities like Mirror Image, Protective Force, Luck,
Mossbody and many more take effect and may reduce damage
or negate the attack completely.
Limb cap
If the attack hit an arm or a leg (or a head in the case of a certain
beings that can live without those), the damage will be limited
to at most half of the maximum HP.
Damage Redistribution
If the defender has Damage Reversal, Blood Bond or Blood
Vengeance it will take effect now and maybe shift the damage
to other targets or maybe even kill the attacker. Killing the
attacker in this stage will not negate the attack.
63

===== PAGE 63 =====
Deal damage
Deal damage to the target as well as any shields that might
have been hit.
Dancing Weapons
Some magic items like the Dancing Trident or the Stone
Birds will float around their wielder and attack nearby
enemies.  These weapons attack independently of their
owner and do not incur any multiple weapon penalty or
fatigue.  They will cause harass penalty to whomever they
attack, just as normal attacks do.  These weapons strike at
different times in the combat round and when or if their
owner is attacking does not matter.
Dancing weapons cannot be repelled, but they can repel
attacks aimed at their owner if they are longer than the
attacking weapon.  Dancing Weapons with more than 2
attacks per round get one point of repel attack bonus per
number of attacks over 2.  Dancing weapons also get an
increased repel penalty if they try to repel repeatedly in a
short time, but the penalty is only half of that for a normal
repelling unit.
Mounted Units
Some combat units like cavalry and chariots are formed
from two or more separate units combined as a single entity.
These are referred to as mounted units.
The individual parts of a rider and its mount can be targeted
and wounded separately and if one dies the other will
remain on the battlefield. A horse without rider will rout
from the battle, but some monsters like the gryphon will
stay and fight even if its rider perishes.
Hitting mounted units
When a mounted unit is attacked either the rider or the
mount is targeted. The chances of hitting the rider vs the
mount is based on the difference of their sizes and the reach
of the attacking unit. If a mount has multiple riders, the size
of the largest rider will be used. The reach of a unit is its size
plus the length of its weapon.
First of all, mounts that are much larger than its rider have
an extra chance of getting hit according to the following
table.
Size difference Chance of targeting mount
3 25
4 50
5+ 75
If the mount wasn't large enough or the attack didn't target
the mount, the attack will choose a target according to the
following rules instead.
* Missile attacks have 50% chance of targeting the mount
* If the mount's size is 2 larger than the reach, the mount will be
targeted
* Otherwise chance of targeting mount is 30% + 10% * mount's
size - 10% * reach. (Chance cannot be lower than 10%).
Some attacks work a bit differently and target one specific
unit or both units.
* All AoE attacks will target both rider and mount.
* Lightning will target both rider and mount.
* Trample will always target the mount.
Mounted units and magic items
It is possible to put a single magic saddle or barding on a
commander's mount.  If the mount should be a commander
for some reason it can have its own misc items too, but that
is rare and usually only a single magic saddle or barding is
allowed.  However, it is possible for the mount to take
advantage of some of the rider's magic items as well as
certain items will bestow some or all of their effects to the
mount as well.  This is indicated in the magic item
information if that is the case.
It is very cumbersome to use two-handed weapons while
mounted and doing so will result in a -3 attack penalty.
Rider skill
Some riders are exceptionally skilled and have the Skilled
Rider ability.  This ability will increase the Morale and
Defence Skill of the mount.  The defence increase is most
effective on lightly armored horses as it is reduced by the
encumbrance value of the mount's armor.
Mounted units and morale
Unnatural fear effects (e.g. Fear auras or Terror spells) will
usually target both the rider and the mount.  If the rider is
routed he will leave the battle together with his mount.  If
only the mount is broken, the rider is thrown to the ground
and the mount routs from battle, but the rider fights on.  If
64

===== PAGE 64 =====
both are broken by a fear effect, the rider will be thrown off
and then both will retreat separately.
Falling off a mount deals a size difference open ended roll of
AN damage. Falling off a chariot does not result in any fall
damage however.
Normal rout checks that affect the entire squad or army will
only affect the rider.  When the rider flees this way he will
flee together with his mount.
Rerecruiting mounted units
When a rider loses his mount he will need to get a new one. 
If there are riderless mounts of the appropriate type that
survived or fled the battle, the rider will claim one of these
and remain in the army.  If on the other hand there are no
surviving mounts to claim the rider will leave the army and
return to his home province.  This might take a few turns if
the rider is far from home.  The traveling rider will not be
affected by province ownership, but he will need to roll
morale checks every turn.  A failed check means the rider
has deserted, lost his way or been killed.  If the rider arrives
in his home province a new mounted unit can be recruited at
half cost.  A small blue number next to the unit icon in the
recruitment screen indicates how many available returned
riders are present.  When rerecruited this new unit retains
his identity including experience and battle afflictions.
Normal mounts do not return to their home province, but
mounts with the tag 'Smart Mount' will.  Just like returning
riders they will add to the number of available half-cost
recruits that are available.  Smart mounts, like riders, retain
their experience and afflictions.
Mounted commanders do not return to their home province
if left without mount.  If there are regular units with the
appropriate mount they will just claim one of these and
force the rider of that mount to return home instead.  If
there are no appropriate mounts the commander will
remain in the army without mount.  However he can spend a
month and use the order 'Reclaim Mount' to get a new
mount.
A few types of riders will automatically regain their mounts.
Missile combat
Missile combat is different from melee combat in that it
doesn’t use defense values.  Instead, the game determines
which square a missile hits, depending on a unit’s Precision,
and the range of the attack.  If there are units in the square,
they may be hit, whether they are friendly or enemy. 
Missiles can’t distinguish friend from foe.
If the range from attacker to target is greater than
Precision/2 – 2 (half the Precision, minus 2) then the missile
will deviate from the target.  The amount of deviation is
equal to the range x 1.25 / Precision.
The game will randomly determine whether the missiles
deviate long or short, left or right, or some combination.  The
actual distribution is a bell curve – most projectiles will fall
within the middle of the deviation range, but some will land
at the extremes.
Once the game decides where a missile lands (even if it is far
away, that square is affected), any unit in that square may be
targeted.  The size of the units relative to one another
influences who will be hit.  If a square with a giant of size 6
and a human of size 3 is hit, the giant will be struck two times
out of three. Once the target has been decided, there is a hit
calculation that uses the following values:
Attacker: DRN + (Size points in the square)/2 +2 if magic
weapon
Defender: DRN + (shield parry value x2) – (Fatigue / 20)
If the attacker’s roll is greater than the defender’s then a hit
is achieved.  Damage is calculated identically to melee
combat (see above).  Most missile weapons add one-half of
the unit’s Strength to the weapon damage value (plus a
random number).  Crossbows and some other weapons are
armor-piercing, meaning that only half of the defender’s
Protection value is used.  Some spells can even be
“armor-negating,” which means that armor affords no
protection.  Lightning spells are armor-negating.  Fire spells
are armor-piercing.
Precision values greater than 10 count double for the
amount above 10.  Thus, a Precision value of 12 is actually
calculated as Precision 14.
Thus, the more units in a square, or the bigger the units in a
square, and the more tired they are, the more likely
someone is going to be hit by a missile weapon landing in
that square.
While it may seem that missile units can’t shoot very far
without having their shots deviate hopelessly, in practice
massed units can deal severe damage to an enemy simply
65

===== PAGE 65 =====
due to the number of projectiles in the air.  Everything that
goes up has to come down somewhere!
Special damage
Some types of damage can cause the target to sustain
additional damage.  Others inflict their damage gradually, or
increase fatigue instead of reducing hit points.  These
include fire, cold, poison, fatigue, paralysis, and drain.
Some units are not as susceptible to certain kinds of
damage.  In Dominions, this is represented by the concept of
resistances.  This works similar to protection, but damage is
also reduced by a percentage after the resistance is
deducted from the damage.  The reduction is equal to twice
the resistance value.  This means that a unit with fire
resistance 50 is completely immune to fire damage.
Example:  A Pillar of Fire spell with 35 fire damage hits an
unarmored unit with 15 fire resistance and an armor with
protection 10. The damage DRN is 11 resulting in a total of
46 fire damage.  Pillar of Fire is armor-piercing, so the armor
only gives protection 5, but the fire resistance gives its full
value of 15.  The protection DRN is only 6 and results in a
total protection value of 26.  The difference is 20 points of
damage, which is reduced by 30% (twice the fire resistance
value).  In the end the target suffers 14 points of damage.
Elemental resistances give double protection against
attacks that cause fatigue damage.  So Shock Resistance 5
would reduce fatigue effects from thunder by 10.  Shock
Resistance 15 would thus give protection of 30 from the
fatigue damage of a Thunder Strike.
Fire damage
Fire is generally armor-piercing, which means that a unit
only gains half its normal benefit from Protection. In
addition, a unit may catch fire, which will subject it to
additional burning damage until the fire goes out.  Fire
fatigue damage only counts as 1/3 when determining the
chance of catching fire.
Chance of catching fire
Fire damage before protection x 4%
A unit that is burning takes (1d(size))/2 damage each turn
until the fire goes out.  In other words a die with a number of
sides equal to the size of the unit and with the result divided
by 2 (rounded up).  So for a size 8 unit it would be (1d8)/2). 
This damage is halved for units with 5 or more points of Fire
Resistance.  The chance of the fire going out is:
Chance of putting out fire
25% + (fire resistance) + (cold scale x5) + (100% if raining)
All fire have a minimum 1% chance of being extinguished. 
Fire vulnerability counts as negative fire resistance.  Units
with 10 or more fire resistance, units with chill auras, units
with mistform and ethereal units, cannot burn.
If the province has heat scales instead, this is treated as
negative cold.
Cold damage
A unit suffering cold damage may freeze.  It will then take
additional fatigue damage until it thaws.
A unit that is freezing takes 2d6 additional fatigue points of
fatigue damage each turn until it thaws.  The chance of
thawing is:
Chance of thawing
25% + (cold resistance) + (heat scale x5)
There is always a minimum of 1% chance of thawing each
round.  Cold vulnerability counts as negative cold resistance.
Units with 10 or more cold resistance, units with heat auras,
and ethereal units will never freeze.
Cold scales work like heat scales for burning: if it’s cold in
the province, the chance of thawing is reduced by the scales.
Profuse bleeding
A unit suffering from profuse bleeding suffers 10 fatigue and
takes HP/20 damage each round.  The chance of the
bleeding stopping in a round is:
Chance to stop bleeding
10% + (regeneration value)
The chance to stop bleeding is halved when fighting
underwater.
Poison damage
Poison works differently than fire or cold.  If a unit takes
poison damage, that damage will be suffered over multiple
rounds, which is the amount of time it takes the poison to
have its effect.  This damage is spread out as evenly as
66

===== PAGE 66 =====
possible.  First, a total amount of damage taken is calculated,
just like with any attack.  Then, each combat round, a unit
will take 10% of the remaining damage.
In addition to taking damage a unit that is under the effect of
poison will also have reduced attack and defence skill. The
skill penalty depends on how much poison is still remaining
in the unit.  The penalty is 25% for every dose equal to the
unit's full amount of HP, capped at a maximum of 50%.
So if a unit with 10 HP (when uninjured) takes 15 points of
poison damage, it will take 2,2,2,1,1,1,1,1,1,1 points of
damage (each number is in one round).  In the first three
rounds it will take 2 points per round, and in the last seven
rounds it will take 1 point per round.  In addition to taking
damage the units attack and defence will be reduced by
37.5% as soon as it gets poisoned, this penalty will then
decrease by time as the remaining amount of poison is
reduced.
Poison resistance has no effect on the duration of damage. 
Once the poison has taken hold, there is no additional
benefit to poison resistance.  It is useful only in reducing the
total amount of damage initially.
Shock damage
Shock damage can Stun a target. The chance of getting
stunned is:
Chance of getting stunned
5% + (percentage of hit points lost from this hit) / 2
Stun prevents the affected unit from taking any action for
one round.
Acid damage
Acid damage can inflict Rust.
Chance of equipment rusting
Acid damage before protection x 4%
Only units with iron weapons or iron armor can be affected
by Rust.
Rust
Rusty armor can be damaged if it takes a hit in combat.
Chance for Rusty armor to be damaged = damage inflicted
(before armor protection, but after shield protection) * 2%
Rusty weapons have a 25% chance of being damaged when
they inflict a hit on something.  Damaged weapons have
their damage reduced by 2, except for blunt weapons which
have their damage reduced by 1.
Life Drain damage
Life Drain damage is not extra damage, but instead is a way
for the attacker to restore his or her hit points and fatigue
by damaging an enemy.  Once damage has been calculated
(if the target is a living unit), the attacker with life drain
receives the following:
Benefits from life drain
Increases hit points with damage / 2
Reduces fatigue by damage x 2
Weapons with partial life drain are less potent, and only the
first 5 points of damage dealt are treated as drain.  The
remainder are considered normal damage only.
Life Drain cannot increase a unit’s hit points above 150% of
its maximum hit points +10.
Lifeless units only take 25% damage (after Protection) and
the damage will not heal the attacker in any way.  Lifeless
units with a life drain attack or weapon will receive the full
benefit from it.
Paralysis damage
Paralysis is a type of damage based in part on the victim’s
size.  It, as you might have guessed, paralyzes the target. 
The number of combat rounds the paralysis lasts (the
duration) is determined by the number of paralysis points
done.
Duration = (Damage – victim's Size) / 2
If that is all the paralysis damage taken, then the target is
only paralyzed for that many rounds.  However, if the target
takes additional paralysis damage, a new duration is
calculated, and the target takes half as many points of
damage as the lesser of the new or old duration.  In other
words
If already paralyzed, Damage = (minimum of old and new
duration) / 2
This damage can never exceed 5 points.
The new duration will be the greater of old and new
67

===== PAGE 67 =====
duration (not cumulative), so if the new attack has a longer
duration, the target will be paralyzed longer.
Fatigue damage
Fatigue damage adds to a unit’s fatigue rather than
subtracting from its hit points.  Units fall unconscious when
they reach 100 fatigue.  No unit can have more than 200
fatigue – each 50 fatigue points inflicted once a unit has
reached 200 inflicts 1 point of hit point damage.  If fewer
than 50 fatigue points are inflicted, the chance of taking 1
hit point of damage is (the number of fatigue points inflicted
x 2)%.
False damage
Illusions as well as most spells from the path of Glamour will
only cause false damage.  The false damage is kept real in the
mind of the victims with the help of glamour magic.  If all
enemy glamour mages die, the false damage will quickly
dissipate (2 points / round) without leaving any scars on the
victims.
The false damage feels real enough that someone taking
damage + false damage equaling his total HP will die
instantly.  False damage will never cause any afflictions,
apart from death.
False damage is shown as light purple numbers and dots in
the battle.
False damage will not trigger certain effects like Damage
Reversal, Blood Vengeance and Blood Bond.  Also
regeneration, life drain and healing spells will not heal false
damage.
Clouds
Certain beings, spells and attacks create battlefield clouds. 
E.g. a Hydra is surrounded by a poison cloud, a Fireball will
leave a lingering heat cloud where it strikes and an attack
with the magic Ice Mist Scimitar will create a large frost
cloud when it is swinged.
Battlefield clouds will dissipate quite fast if not replenished,
having their strength reduced by about 1 level per battle
round until it disappears.  Multiple clouds of the same type
cannot overlap, if there are many units spreading the same
type of cloud they will simply spread the cloud further away
instead.  However clouds can sometimes increase the level
of a cloud square by at most one level instead of spreading
further away.
Damage from clouds is always armor negating.  The
different type of clouds and their effects are listed in the
following tables:
Frost Cloud
Level 1 2 fatigue
Level 2 3 fatigue
Level 3 4 fatigue, 1 damage
Level 4 5 fatigue, 2 damage
Level 5+ 6+ fatigue, 3+ damage
(damage is capped to 1 unless unit is frozen)
Heat Cloud
Level 1 2 fatigue
Level 2 3 fatigue
Level 3 4 fatigue, 1 damage
Level 4 5 fatigue, 2 damage
Level 5+ 6+ fatigue, 3+ damage
Poison Cloud
Level 1 1 poison
Level 2 2 poison
Level 3+ 3+ poison
Disease Cloud
Level 1 disease (easy MR)
Level 2 disease (easy MR)
Level 3+ disease (MR)
Sulphur Cloud
Level 1 1 fire fatigue + 1 poison
Level 2 1 fire fatigue + 1 poison
Level 3 2 fire fatigue + 1 poison
Level 4 2 fire fatigue + 2 poison
Level 5 3 fire fatigue + 2 poison
Level 6 3 fire fatigue + 3 poison
Level 7 4 fire fatigue + 3 poison
(poison is capped to 1 point of damage)
Rust Cloud
Level 1 armor rusts
Level 2 armor rusts
Level 3+ armor rusts
Death Cloud
Level 1 1 damage (MR)
Level 2 2 damage (MR)
Level 3+ 3+ damage (MR)
68

===== PAGE 68 =====
Shimmering Light Cloud
Level 1 1 capped false damage (easy MR)
Level 2 1 capped false damage (MR)
Level 3 2 false damage (MR)
Level 4+ 3+ false damage (MR)
Leeching Cloud
Level 1 weakness (easy MR)
Level 2 weakness (easy MR), 1 damage (easy MR)
Level 3 weakness (MR), 1 damage (easy MR)
Level 4+ weakness (MR), 1 damage (MR)
(weakness decreases Str by 1 permanently)
(all damage is capped to 1)
Sleep Cloud
Level 1 sleep (easy MR)
Level 2 sleep (MR)
Level 3+ sleep (MR)
All type of clouds range from level 1 to 7. Sometimes the
effects of the different levels are the same and higher level
clouds will only last longer. All damage from clouds is armor
negating.
Monsters that spread clouds, e.g. Hydra and Ghost, spread
level 1 clouds.  As they are spread at level 1 they can
accumulate to at most a level 2 cloud. Spells and magic items
can create clouds at higher levels.
Heat Clouds and Frost Clouds cancel out each other and it is
not possible for both of them to be in the same square.
Morale and rout
Morale
Morale is a measure of how likely a squad is to keep fighting
after taking casualties.  Each unit has a morale value, but the
morale value that is checked is the morale level of the entire
squad.  Each squad has a morale level, which is the average
of all the morale ratings of the members of the squad.
Morale bonuses
A unit can have a number of modifiers to its morale.  For
example, Sacred units can be blessed, which increases their
morale by 1.  In addition, all units can gain the following
bonuses:
* +1 for fighting in friendly dominion
* +1 for fighting in a unit’s  home province (the province where it
was recruited)
* +x for a commander's leadership bonus (click on Leadership
attribute)  This is further modified by the formation in which
the unit is fighting, how many squads the commander is leading,
etc.
* +1 for every level of the Inspirational ability the squad's
commander has (can also be negative)
* +x if there is a unit with the Standard ability in the squad,
where x is the bonus from highest Standard
Morale, magic bonus
Many magic effects can modify a unit's magic bonus to
morale. This bonus can go from -10 to +1. Units with fear
will lower this bonus and priests can increase it with the
Sermon of Courage and Fanaticism spells. Most combat spell
that causes some kind of fear effect will also modify this
bonus.
The morale magic bonus will increase by 1 about every 2
rounds if it is negative. A positive bonus will last the entire
battle if left to itself.
Rout
During combat, squads will have their members killed and
wounded, and eventually they will take flight from the field. 
This is called routing, and happens to the entire squad.
Rout is normally checked by squad.  A squad which fails its
morale check routs.  A squad will check morale if:
In a few rare cases a unit routs independently from its
squad.  This might happen if a mount loses its rider.
* The squad has suffered “heavy losses” since the last morale
check, and its overall casualties are at least 20%
* The squad has four or fewer units left in it and at least one of
the units has taken damage this round
* The squad is near a monster causing Fear (e.g. an Abomination)
* The squad has been subjected to a spell causing Fear (e.g.
Terror). Note that the spells causing Frighten do not apply.
* The entire army has taken 50% or more of its total hit point
value in casualties.  In this case, morale will be checked every
turn for the remainder of the battle.  Retinues are excluded
from this "greater than 50% of army hit points" if there is
nothing more than one creature and its retinue.  This is a
special case.
69

===== PAGE 69 =====
“Heavy losses” is one wound for every two members of the
squad.  A “wound” is simply 1 or more hit points of damage
that reduces a unit to 80% or less of its normal hit points.  So
a unit with 25 hit points that is undamaged and suffers 4
points of damage does not count as having suffered a
“wound” for these purposes.  The next point of damage,
however, will reduce him to 80% of normal, and every hit
thereafter (even if for 1 point) will continue to satisfy these
criteria.  Units are very enthusiastic at the beginning of
battle, but less so after taking damage.
No matter how many times the above conditions are
satisfied, a squad cannot have its morale checked more than
once a turn.
Army rout
Once an army has taken 75% of its total hit point value in
casualties in a battle, it will automatically rout.
Mounts only have 25% of their HP count towards the army's
total HP. Any units from the Province Defence also only
have 25% of their HP count, they are expected to run. Slaves
are also expected to run and only have 50% of their HP
count.
Morale check
A morale check consists of two numbers, the morale roll and
the fear roll.  If the fear roll is greater than the morale roll,
the squad routs.  If not, the squad keeps fighting.  Although it
is called the “fear roll,” it applies to anything that checks
morale, not just fear.
Morale roll: squad morale + DRN + survivor bonus
Fear roll: 14 + DRN
The survivor bonus ranges from 0-5, depending on how
many of the squad’s original members are still alive.  The
smaller the proportion of survivors, the smaller the bonus. 
An intact (or almost intact) squad will get a bonus of 5.  A
squad that has been almost wiped out gets no bonus.
Rout effects
A routed unit will use all of its action points each turn to
move towards its own side of the battlefield and off the
friendly edge.
A routing unit suffers a -4 penalty to its defense skill.  Fast
units can be very effective at picking off enemy units that
are routing, as they have a better chance of catching them
before they exit the map.
Once a routing unit reaches the map edge, it is safe, and on
the turn after the battle will appear in a province adjacent to
the battle (see Retreat rules on page 72).  If a unit
retreats to an enemy province, it is destroyed.  A routed
army may scatter to multiple provinces after a battle,
requiring a commander to go collect it.  Routed units
suffering from profuse bleeding, poison, burning, decay or
other special damage will have the remainder of that
damage applied once they get off the map edge and may not
survive.  This represents the unit successfully fleeing the
battle but expiring of its wounds before finding help.
Units in a victorious army can rout off the map as well, since
a squad can rout while others are winning the battle.  If the
battle ends before the routing units exit the map, at the end
of the battle they remain with the victorious army.  If they
rout off the map before the battle ends, they scatter to
adjacent provinces.
Mindless units
Mindless units need to be under the control of a
commander.  If there are no unrouted commanders on the
battlefield eligible to command mindless units, remaining
mindless units on the field are automatically subject to
mindless dissolution.
If all eligible commanders (i.e. commanders who can
command mindless units) have been killed or routed, the
mindless beings become immobile and have a 33% chance
each turn of dissolving and vanishing from the battle.  They
will not move, but will attack adjacent units.
Magic beings and undead
These units have special leadership requirements, such as
magical leadership or undead leadership.  If such units are
on the battlefield without proper leadership, they will rout.
If a unit is both an undead and a magic being (such as the
manikins of Asphodel), it requires undead leadership to lead.
Demons require undead leadership to lead.
Magic fear effects
There are two types of magic fear effects: fear and frighten. 
Fear is the most severe and the most common one, it can
decrease morale by up to 10 points.  Being subject to fear
will also force the entire squad to make a morale check at
the end of the round, failure means it will break.  Units hit by
70

===== PAGE 70 =====
magic fear effects may also break individually if they fail an
easy morale check.
Breaking individually will make the unit flee while his
companions stay and continue to fight. This can only occur
due to magic fear, normally the squad will always break and
flee together.
Frighten is much less severe.  It can lower morale by up to 5
points, but does not force any automatic morale checks.
Long lasting battles and Twilight
If a battle goes on for too long the sun sets.  This will have
profound effects on the remainder of the battle.  Battle
enchantments and other spells will end and the battlefield
will be affected by Twilight, as per the spell.  Berserking ends
and berserkers cannot go berserk again.
Turn Effects
100 Twilight: All enchantments, temporary magic effects and
berserking ends, Twilight effect (-2 prec, +1 glamour magic).
150 Nightfall/Daybreak: Attacking units rout, Darkness effect
(-3 att/def/prec), or return to daylight in case of a night time
battle.
170 Defending units rout.
200 Any units left on the battlefield are killed.
Note that mindless units cannot rout and will dissolve
instead of routing.
Afflictions
Whenever a unit is struck in battle, it may suffer an
affliction. The chance of this occurring is simply the % hit
points lost in the blow.  So if a normal 10HP soldier receives
two 4HP blows, he would have a 40% chance and then
another 40% chance of getting an affliction.  What type of
affliction is suffered depends on which part of the body was
struck.
It is possible to get more than one affliction if the damage
exceeds 100%, e.g. a single blow dealing 15HP damage on a
10HP soldier would result in one affliction and then a 50%
chance for an additional one. Of course the soldier would be
dead afterwards, so the extra affliction would only matter if
he was raised from the dead somehow.
There are major afflictions and minor afflictions.  The chance
of an affliction being major is affliction chance / 1.5, or at
most 33%.  Where the hit occurs determines which kind of
afflictions may be inflicted.  The game will randomize from
all afflictions available for that level (major or minor) and
that body part.
Body Part Minor Affliction Major Affliction
Any Battle Fright
Profuse Bleeding
Head Eye Loss Dementia
Mute Feeblemindedness
Blindness
Chest Chest Wound Diseased
Never-Healing Wound
Arm Weakened Lost an arm
Leg Limp Crippled
Profuse Bleeding is the only affliction that is not permanent:
it will disappear during or after the battle.  While a unit
bleeds, it loses 5% of its hit points and gains 10 fatigue per
round of combat.  The bleeding has a 10% chance of
stopping per round.  Being underwater halves this chance
and regeneration increases it.
Limp will cause commanders to suffer a -4 map movement
penalty.  Non-commander units do not lose any map
movement points, but whenever their army marches more
than one province in a month, they will have a 25% chance of
becoming crippled.
Cripple will cause commanders to lose 75% of their map
movement speed.  Non-commander units do not lose any
map movement points, but whenever their army marches,
they will have a 35% chance of dying, or a 70% chance of
dying if marching more than one province.
Sieges
Fortresses must be reduced before they can be stormed.  To
reduce a fortress, its Defense value must be reduced to zero.
Each turn, the total reduction strength of the besiegers is
compared to the total repair strength of the defenders.
Reduction strength = unit strength squared
* Flying units are doubled
Repair strength = unit strength squared / 2
* Flying units are doubled
* Mindless units are only worth 1/8th of calculated value
* Animals (not monkeys!) are halved
* Undisciplined units are halved
71

===== PAGE 74 =====
The False Damage Regen gained from glamour will heal 1
point of false damage per combat round. A unit can receive
false damage when attacked by illusions and certain
glamour spells.
Indirect magic applies to all units with any magic skill,
including pretenders, within the level activation
requirements described above.
Types of spells
Spells are divided into two basic categories:  Rituals and
Battle Magic.  The spell lists in the Appendix are also divided
in this way.
Battle Magic
Battle magic can only be cast during a tactical battle.  These
spells have battle effects like inflicting damage, granting
increased protection, reducing fatigue, or some similar
effect which only makes sense in the context of the battle
mechanics.
Battle magic can be scripted into a mage’s list of battle
actions using Set battle orders.  If a battle spell requires
gems, that mage must have those gems in his inventory
before the battle begins.
Some battle spells affect the whole battlefield and are
termed battle enchantments.  Some of these last the length
of the battle.  A battle enchantment is dispelled if its caster
dies.
All battle enchantments and temporary magic effects are
dispelled if the battle lasts until sunset (see Long Lasting
Battles and Twilight page <<-1).
Interrupts
Spells have to be prepared for a while before they can be
cast.  During this preparation time, the caster can be
interrupted if he is damaged.
The preparation time is about half of the time required to
cast the spell.  The other half of the time is spent recovering
after the spell has been cast.  The casting time for most
spells is about one combat round, but battle enchantments
and spells that cost magic gems often take longer.
The chance of being interrupted when damaged while
casting a spell is expressed as a percentage of your full hit
points caused by the damage, plus 25%.  Thus, a strike that
inflicted half of a spell caster’s full hit points in damage
would have a 75% chance of interrupting the spell being
cast.
Units with the “combat caster” ability (such as the paladin)
are half as likely to be interrupted as a normal unit. 
Mindless units are also half as likely to be interrupted as a
normal unit would be.
Some monsters are innate spell casters.  These monsters do
not require any preparation time for their spells and do not
care about different casting times.
Battle Magic mechanics
The method for resolving battle magic is very similar to that
75
Path Level 1+ Level 3+ Level 4+
Fire Ldr +10/level, Magic Ldr +10/level, Shorter life Fire Res +5 Fire Res +5
Air Magic Ldr +10/level Shock Res +5 Shock Res +5
Water Magic Ldr +10/level Cold Res +5 Cold Res +5
Earth Magic Ldr +10/level Natural Protection +3 Affliction Resistance +1
Astral Magic Ldr +20/level - Magic Resistance +1
Death Undead Ldr +50/level Rarely dies of old age Morale +10
Nature Magic Ldr +10/level, Supplies +10/level, Longer life Poison Res +5 Poison Res +5
Glamour Magic Ldr +10/level False Damage Regen True Sight
Blood Undead Ldr +10/level, Magic Ldr +10/level HP +5 HP +5
Indirect Magic bonuses
Example
 You are playing Asphodel, Carrion Woods and select a Freak 
Lord pretender.  You take advantage of the 10-point cost for 
new paths and choose Fire 2, Air 2, Water 3, Earth 4, and Blood 
1. Your pretender will gain +20 Leadership and +20 Magic 
Leadership (for Fire 2), +20 Magic Leadership (for Air 2), +5 
Cold Resistance and +30 Magic Leadership (for Water 3), +3 
Protection, +1 Affliction Resistance and +40 Magic Leadership 
(for Earth 4) and +10 Undead Leadership and +10 Magic 
Leadership for Blood 1.

===== PAGE 75 =====
for missile weapons.  Mages have a Precision attribute just
like archers do.  Spells have a Precision rating, also.  For the
purposes of calculation these two are added together.
Some spells (like Acid Bolt) are armor-piercing.  This means
Protection against them only counts for half, just like
armor-piercing missiles.  Some other spells (like Orb
Lightning) are armor-negating.  This means they completely
bypass Protection, and the target’s only defense is the die
roll.
In some cases, instead of Protection, though, some spells
check a target’s Magic Resistance.  It actually is protection. 
Protection from magic!  Magic Resistance is most often
binary in nature, it either protects the target or it does not,
with nothing in-between.  Against some spells a successful
resistance check merely means crippling injuries rather than
instant death.
Some spells (mostly Astral) require the caster to defeat the
target’s Magic Resistance before the spell can take effect.  If
a spell description states that “Magic resistance negates”
then the following check is made:
Caster’s Penetration roll: 11 + DRN + (additional skill in spell
path) / 2
Target’s MR roll: Magic Resistance + DRN + (skill in spell path) / 2
The caster wins ties.  Note that not all targets will have any
magic skill, much less skill in that spell’s path, so often the
target will simply add Magic Resistance and the DRN.
If a spell description states that “Magic resistance negates
easily” then the caster suffers a –4 modifier to his or her
penetration roll.  This is the same as "easy to resist."  "Hard
to resist" gives a +4 to penetration roll.
Some battle enchantments have effects that continuously
affect units on the battlefield and require a magic resistance
check to resist. These follow the same rules as above and
can take advantage of skillful casters and penetration
boosting magic items.
Fatigue
Just like attacking in combat, casting spells in battle costs
fatigue.  Each spell has a listed fatigue cost which a caster
incurs when casting that spell.  For each skill level in the
required path that the mage exceeds the minimum, he incurs
1 / (1 + (mage skill – minimum skill) of the listed spell fatigue.
In other words, having an extra skill level means the mage
suffers only ½ fatigue, two extra skill levels means he suffers
only 1/3 as much, three extra is ¼, and so forth.
Spell casters also incur fatigue equal to their base
Encumbrance value + 2x Encumbrance value of any armor
worn for each spell cast.  This is not subject to reduction by
skill bonuses.  It is harder to make magical gestures in heavy
armor.  Everyone knows this from armor class days.
Fatigue is very important for spell casters.  It is often the
limiting factor in combat, and higher-skill mages thus have
an advantage in that they incur less fatigue.  Spells that
reduce fatigue, like Reinvigoration or Relief, can be very
useful as well.
Rituals
Rituals are spells which have an effect on the world map, and
take an entire month (game turn) to cast.  Thus, mages which
are to cast a ritual have to be given that order as part of the
turn.  If a ritual requires gems, the mage may only use gems
from a laboratory and rituals can only be cast in provinces
with labs (assuming the national pool has enough gems of
the required type).  The gems will be withdrawn from the
national inventory automatically.
Some rituals affect the entire province that they are cast in. 
Some of these (but not all) last longer than one turn.  These
are termed local enchantments.
An example of such a spell is Dome of Air.  Once the Dome of
Air is cast, it persists in that province until dispelled.  The
spell is dispelled if the caster dies.  Most local enchantments
are also dispelled if the province they affect is conquered by
an enemy.
Some local enchantments have a limited duration and extra
gems have to be put into the enchantment during its
creation to make it last longer than a single turn. Most
enchantments with limited duration last 1 month per 1 extra
gem, but some can last as long as 3 months per 1 extra gem.
Rituals can be automated to be recast each month by the
same mage using the [Shift]+[m] shortcut when selected and
in a laboratory province.  The mage will cast the spell as long
as he has enough gems.
If you tried to cast a spell and it didn’t get cast, the most
likely problem is that you didn’t have enough gems of the
correct type.
76

===== PAGE 76 =====
Global Enchantments
Global enchantments are rituals.  These are very powerful
spells that affect the entire world of Dominions 6.  They
often cost a lot of gems and have severe effects.  Only a
certain number of such spells can be in effect at any one
time.  This can be 3, 5, 7, or 9 and can be changed in Game
Setup.You can find out which global enchantments are in
effect at any point of a game by clicking on the Global
Enchantments button in the main screen, or just hitting F6.
When casting a global enchantment, you have the option of
adding more gems to the spell than are required.  This is
because the more gems you use to cast a spell, the harder it
is to dispel it.
The maximum number of gems a mage can use to cast a
ritual is his or her path level x 100.  So a skillful mage casting
a simple global enchantment can put very many extra gems
into it if he or she wants.
Just like local enchantments, global enchantments are
dependent on their caster.  If the caster dies, the global is
dispelled.  This can be because he died of old age, or because
some clever enemy realized it was easier to assassinate him
than to try to dispel the massive global spell he had put 200
extra gems into.  Extra gems don’t protect mages against
assassination.  Immortal units will also lose their
enchantments if they die and have to wait for their bodies to
reform.
Some global enchantments are tied to a specific province,
e.g. Stellar Focus focuses the stellar energies into a single
land where the power is then collected.  If this specific
country is conquered by the enemy the global enchantment
will be dispelled.  By pressing F6 you can see the origin listed
for any global enchantments that are tied to a specific
province.
Dispelling global enchantments
Global enchantments can be dispelled in two ways.  The first
is by casting one of the different dispel rituals.  The most
commonly used one is an Enchantment-5 spell that is
Astral-3 (that’s a spell that requires a skill of 3 in the Astral
path, and is level 5 in the Enchantment school of magic) and
is called Dispel.  The other way is to cast another global
enchantment when the maximum allowable number of
global spells is already active.  The next one will replace one
of the existing ones if it is successful in overcoming it.  The
enchantment it will attempt to replace is random, so casting
a global enchantment to dispel a specific enemy global is
unlikely to select exactly that spell.  However, it’s better
than nothing.
The exception to this is if you try to cast a global
enchantment that is already in effect by another nation.  In
this case, your version will try to replace the enemy version
instead of trying to replace a random existing global.
To reiterate:  when a global enchantment is cast, the
following cases are applied in order:
* if there is already a global of the same name active, the new
global attempts to replace it according to the dispel mechanics
* if there are fewer than five (usually) active enchantments and
there is not already an instance of this spell active, the newly
cast global immediately fills one of the empty slots
* if there are already the maximum number of global spells
active, the newly cast global attempts to replace a randomly
chosen spell.  This can be a spell cast by the same nation casting
the new global.  You can accidentally dispel your own spells. 
These are unruly magicks.
Spells cast by multiple mages are cast in a random order. 
This is true for all mages, not just those of a given nation. 
What happens at any given time depends on how many
global spells are active, and which ones they are.  There may
only be two globals active at the beginning of a turn, but by
the time a mage casts his own, several other mages may
have filled up the remaining slots.
Dispel mechanics
Whenever Dispel is cast or a global tries to replace another
for whatever reason, the two spells are compared.  The total
number of extra gems and the levels of the casters above
their spells’ requirements are compared according to the
following formula:
* +1 for each extra gem (above the requirement for casting)
* +5 for each level of skill by the casting mage in the spell’s path
above the casting requirement
A DRN (two open-ended dice) is added to each side.  The
side with the higher number wins.
77

===== PAGE 102 =====
Two handed weapons: Very Powerful Magical Items (Construction level 7)
Name Path Att Def Dmg Len Special properties
Staff of Elemental Mastery F4W4 2 4 3 3 Elemental +1, Elemental Spell Range +25%, FR +5, CR +5
Carmine Cleaver F2E1 4 1 18 2 AP, FR +5, On dmg: Burn Flesh
Staff of Storms A5 2 4 3 3 Corpse construction Bonus 8, On hit: Shock (12 AN), spell: Lightning
Bolt, casts: Storm
Staff of Elemental Mastery A4E4 2 4 3 3 Stoneskin, Elemental +1, Elemental Spell Range +25%, SR +5
Demon Bane W1 5 2 15 2 HP +5, FR +15
Wave Breaker W3 3 3 10 3 Water Breathing, 3 attacks, casts: Friendly Currents
Rime Hammer W2A1 5 1 21 3 CR +10
Gate Cleaver E3 -1 -1 29 2 AN, Siege Strength +100
Standard of the Damned D4 -2 -3 1 4 Mun, Fear +5, spell: Drain Life
Banner of the Northern Star S4 -2 -3 1 4 Mun, MR -2, casts: Light of the Northern Star
Treelord's Staff N5 2 4 3 3 Nature Magic +2, Nature Spell Range +25%, Awaken Vine Men
Bonus 2, FS
Hell Sword B2F2 5 1 14 2 FR +10, Berserker +3, Partial life drain
Jellyberd S1F1 2 3 0 3 Protective Force 20, On strike: Jellyberd Poison, Nation restricted
Two handed weapons: Unique Magical Artifacts (Construction level 9)
Name Path Att Def Dmg Len Special properties
Sword of Justice F3S3 3 4 15 2 Priest +1, FR +15, spell: Prison of Fire, On strike: Holy Fire
Tempest A5 5 6 15 2 SR +15, spell: Thunder Strike, casts: Storm, On strike: Chain Lightning
Trident from Beyond W3S2 2 3 13 3 Water Magic +1, On dmg: Soul Slay
The Stone Sword E5 4 7 10 2 MR +4, On strike: Area Petrification
Hammer of the Forge Lord E5F3 1 0 20 2 Forge Bonus 4, On strike: Small Area Fire
The Sword of Many Colors G4F2 3 5 17 2 Glamour Magic +1, Temp Glamour Gems 2, Awe +3, Glamour
Manipulator, On strike: Killing Light
The Oath Rod of Kurgi S3B3 3 5 5 3 Astral Magic +1, Blood Magic +1, Spell Range +25%, spell: Horror Mark,
On dmg: Feeblemind
The Flailing Hands D2 4 -1 10 2 Death Magic +1, Penetration +1, MR +1, 2 attacks, On hit: Fear and Cold
Sun Slayer D6 5 6 13 2 Death Magic +1, Fear +5, spell: Drain Life, casts: Darkness, On strike:
Area Death
Harvest Blade B3N1 10 -5 16 0 Cursed, Morale +2, Fear +5, Berserker +2, Instant Berserk, On strike:
Leg Chop
Infernal Sword B1F1 4 4 14 2 AP, FR +5, On dmg: Banish to Inferno
The Staff from the Sun S5F1 3 3 4 3 Fire Magic +1, Fire Spell Range +50%, Temp Fire Gems 1, FR +15, On
strike: Area Fire
Missile weapons: Magical Trinkets (Construction level 1)
Name Path Range Prec Dmg Special properties
Sling of Accuracy A1 40 5 12 Uses str/2
103

===== PAGE 103 =====
Missile weapons: Lesser Magical Items (Construction level 3)
Name Path Range Prec Dmg Special properties
Just Man's Cross F1 45 4 12 AP, Uses str/3
Trueshot Longbow A1 50 30 12 Uses str/2
The Pebble Pouch E1 Str/3 0 8 Size req 6, Strength req 20
Piercer E1A1 35 10 12 AN, Str not added
Black Bow of Botulf D1 45 5 12 Uses str/2, On dmg: Feeblemind
Mirage Bola G1 Str 2 0 On hit: False Fetters
Missile weapons: Greater Magical Items (Construction level 5)
Name Path Range Prec Dmg Special properties
Fire Bola F1 Str 2 2 On hit: Fire Bonds
Thunder Bow A2 40 3 0 AN, On strike: Small Area Shock
Golden Arbalest A1E1 55 10 15 AP, 2 attacks, Uses str/3
Vision's Foe A1D1 50 10 13 AN, Uses str/3, On hit: Eyeloss
Vine Bow N1 35 0 5 Uses str/2, On hit: Entanglement
Sling of Crystal Shards G1E1 30 -1 6 AP, MindIm, Glamour Manipulator, 6 attacks, Max 1 dmg, Uses str/2, On
dmg: Shard Illusion
Carrion Bow N1D1 35 0 5 Uses str/2, On hit: Entanglement, cost: 3 nature gems + 2 death gems,
Nation restricted
Missile weapons: Very Powerful Magical Items (Construction level 7)
Name Path Range Prec Dmg Special properties
Bow of War A1 40 0 8 Mun, 13 attacks, Uses str/2
Ethereal Crossbow S1 45 5 999 AN, MR, MindIm
Ivory Bow D3A1 50 2 12 AP, Undead Command 15, 3 attacks, Uses str/2, On dmg: Decay
Banefire Crossbow D1 45 2 10 AP, Curses wielder, Uses str/3, On strike: Area Decay
Missile weapons: Unique Magical Artifacts (Construction level 9)
Name Path Range Prec Dmg Special properties
Bow of the Titans A3S2 100 100 22 AP, Air Spell Range +25%, Strength req 18, spell: Seeking Arrow
Shields: Magical Trinkets (Construction level 1)
Name Path Prot Def Parry Enc Special properties
Blacksteel Tower Shield E1 23 -2 9 2 Cannot be used by mounted units
Blacksteel Kite Shield E1 29 -2 8 2
Enchanted Shield S1 17 -1 7 1
Raw Hide Shield N1 13 0 4 0
Shields: Lesser Magical Items (Construction level 3)
Name Path Prot Def Parry Enc Special properties
Weightless Tower Shield A2 16 0 8 0 Cannot be used by mounted units
Weightless Kite Shield A2 21 0 7 0
Lead Shield E2 23 -3 6 3 MR +4
Shield of Valor E1A1 21 -1 8 1 Air Shield
Lucky Coin G2 19 0 4 0 Luck, Affects mount too
Shield of Meteoritic Iron S3E2 30 -4 7 4 Cannot be used by mounted units, casts: Power of the
Spheres
Eye Shield N2 16 0 5 0 Eye Vengeance 1 v MR
Ice Aegis W2 21 -1 8 1 CR +5, Ice Armor 1
104

===== PAGE 104 =====
Shields: Greater Magical Items (Construction level 5)
Name Path Prot Def Parry Enc Special properties
Golden Hoplon F2 23 -1 9 1 FR +15
Charcoal Shield E2F1 26 -1 5 1 FR +10
Mirror of Long Lost Battles G2 22 -2 8 2 Glamour Manipulator, Cannot be used by mounted units
Shield of the Accursed S2B1 21 -1 7 1 Defence Skill +3, Horror Mark Attacker 5 vs MR
Vine Shield N2 13 0 5 0
Totem Shield N1S1 13 0 4 0 Curses attacker
Shields: Very Powerful Magical Items (Construction level 7)
Name Path Prot Def Parry Enc Special properties
Shield of Gleaming Gold F1G1 23 -1 9 1 Awe +1
Scutata Volturnus A1E1 21 -2 9 2 SR +5, Cannot be used by mounted units, casts: Shocking
Grasp
Lantern Shield D2F1 23 -1 6 1 Fear +5, Magic Command 1, Retinue 3 Corpse Candles
Corpse Candle x3 HP 4, Prot 0, MR 13, Mor 50, Str 4, Att 19, Def 19, Prec 5, Enc 0, CS 20, MM 22, SS, Float, Eth, Spi, Magic,
Mind, NNEat, PR +15, SpSi, Wpn: Bane Burst
Shields: Unique Magical Artifacts (Construction level 9)
Name Path Prot Def Parry Enc Special properties
Immaculate Shield F3S2 30 -1 9 1 Blessed, Priest +1, Awe +2
Barrier E4 40 -2 11 2 Strength +4, FR +15, SR +15, Cannot be used by mounted
units
The Aegis E5 25 -1 7 1 Fear +5, Petrify Attacker 1 v MR
Shield of the Dawn E2S1 35 -2 9 2 MR +1, Aff Res 1, FR +5, Awe +1
Armors: Magical Trinkets (Construction level 1)
Name Path Prot Def Enc Special properties
Blacksteel Plate E1 17 -1 2 HP +4
Blacksteel Full Plate E2 24 -3 4 HP +4
Enchanted Ring Mail Armor S1 13 -1 1 HP +4
Berserker Pelt N1 9 0 0 HP +4, Berserker +1, Instant Berserk
Armors: Lesser Magical Items (Construction level 3)
Name Path Prot Def Enc Special properties
Fire Plate F1 16 -1 2 HP +4, Morale +2, FR +5
Robe of Missile Protection A1 3 0 0 Air Shield, HP +2
Lightweight Scale Mail A1 12 0 1 HP +4
Mirror Armor G1A1 13 -1 1 HP +4, MR +3
Shambler Skin Armor W1 9 0 1 HP +4, Water Breathing, Air Breathing
Dire Wolf Pelt N1 8 0 1 HP +4, Attack Skill +1, Defence Skill +1, CR +5
Kithaironic Lion Pelt N1E1 6 -1 1 HP +4, Invulnerability 18, cost: 3 nature gems + 2 earth gems
Ranger's Cloak N1 5 0 0 HP +4, Stealth Boost +30
Gossamer Gown G1 3 0 0 HP +2, Awe +1
Purple Silk Garments S1W1 8 0 0 HP +2, MR +1, Defence Skill +2, Twist Fate, cost: 3 astral pearls + 2 water
gems, Nation restricted
Armor of the Five Elements E1A1 17 -1 2 HP +4, MR +1, FR +5, SR +5, CR +5, cost: 2 earth gems + 2 air gems, Nation
restricted
105

===== PAGE 105 =====
Armors: Greater Magical Items (Construction level 5)
Name Path Prot Def Enc Special properties
Red Dragon Scale Mail F2 16 -1 1 HP +6, Morale +4, FR +15
Copper Plate A1 13 -1 2 HP +6, SR +10, casts: Charge Body
Silver Hauberk A2E1 17 -1 1 Air Shield, HP +6
Brightmail Haubergeon A1E1 13 0 0 HP +6, Reinvig 1
Brightmail Hauberk A2E1 17 0 0 HP +8, Reinvig 2
Armor of Meteoritic Iron E1S1 23 -3 5 HP +6, MR +3
Elemental Armor E2F1 20 -3 4 HP +6, FR +10, SR +10, CR +10
Blue Dragon Scale Mail W2 16 -1 1 HP +6, Morale +4, CR +15
Robe of the Sea W3 3 0 0 Water Magic +1, HP +2, Water Breathing, Air Breathing
Shroud of the Battle Saint S1 9 0 0 Blessed, Cursed, HP +2
Robe of Shadows S2 3 0 0 Eth, HP +2, Stealth Boost +20
Shademail Haubergeon G2E1 13 0 0 HP +6, Stealth 20
Green Dragon Scale Mail N2 16 -1 1 HP +6, Morale +4, PR +15
Chain Mail of Displacement G2 19 -2 2 HP +6
Armor of Souls B5 16 -1 1 Blood Magic +1, HP +10, MR +5, Invulnerability 15
Armor of Twisting Thorns B3N2 13 -1 5 Cursed, Nature Magic +1, Blood Magic +1, PR +5, Poison Barbs 10 AN
dmg
Salamander Silk Garments F1 8 0 0 HP +2, MR +1, FR +15, Awe +1, Nation restricted
White Dragon Scale Mail A2 16 -1 1 HP +6, Morale +4, SR +15
Black Dragon Scale Mail E2 16 -1 1 HP +6, Morale +4, Acid Res +15
Armors: Very Powerful Magical Items (Construction level 7)
Name Path Prot Def Enc Special properties
Armor of Knights E1 20 -2 3 HP +6
Marble Armor E2 16 -1 3 Stoneskin, HP +8
Stymphalian Wings E4 18 -4 3 Flying, Trample, HP +10, Attack Skill -4, Fear +5, Cannot be used by
mounted units
Weightless Scale Mail A1 12 0 0 HP +4
Rainbow Armor G1W1 11 -1 1 HP +8, MR +2, Reinvig 3
Robe of the Magi A5B5 3 0 0 Magic +1, HP +2, Reinvig 5, Tainted
Robe of Invulnerability D2 4 0 0 HP +8, Invulnerability 25
Rime Hauberk W2 16 -2 2 HP +8, CR +10, Ice Armor 1, Chill 8
Jade Armor W2E1 16 -1 4 Quickness, HP +8
Bone Armor D4 7 -2 2 Soul Vortex, HP +8, CR +5, Invulnerability 15
Hydra Skin Armor N2 12 -1 1 HP +8, Regen 10%, PR +15
Cloak of Invisibility G3 3 0 0 HP +2, Stealth 20, Unseen
Bloodstone Armor B3E2 20 -3 6 HP +16, Strength +2, Regen 10%, Heavy
Silver Silk Garments S1A1 8 0 0 HP +2, MR +2, Reinvig 2, Twist Fate, cost: 3 astral pearls + 2 air gems,
Nation restricted
106

===== PAGE 116 =====
Path Boosting Magic Artifacts
F A W E S D N G B H Name Requires Research
1 Sword of Justice F3S3 9
1 Trident from Beyond W3S2 9
1 The Sword of Many Colors G4F2 9
1 1 The Oath Rod of Kurgi S3B3 9
1 The Flailing Hands D2 9
2 Sceptre of Dark Regency D6 9
1 Sword of Injustice D4 9
1 Sun Slayer D6 9
1 Dimensional Rod S3 9
1 The Staff from the Sun S5F1 9
1 Immaculate Shield F3S2 9
1 1 1 1 Crown of the Elements F4W4 9
1 Flesh Ward B4 9
1 Pebble Skin Suit B4E1 9
1 Boots of Antaeus E4N1 9
1 The Ruby Eye F3 9
1 1 Tome of High Power A2S2 9
1 1 1 Atlas of Creation E5S5 9
1 Orb of Atlantis W4E1 9
2 2 The Forbidden Light S5F5 9
1 The Black Mirror S4B2 9
1 Tome of the Lower Planes S3B2 9
1 1 The Black Book of Secrets D2B2 9
1 1 The Tome of Gaia N2E2 9
2 Tome of Legends G5 9
1 1 1 The Trapped Dreams of Hruvur G4S4 9
1 Orb of Elemental Fire F4 9
1 Orb of Elemental Air A4 9
1 Orb of Elemental Water W4 9
1 Orb of Elemental Earth E4 9
2 The Void Sphere S6B1 9
117

===== PAGE 117 =====
Battlefield Spells
These spells can only be cast in battle. Any summons gained
through battle magic exist only as long as the battle lasts -
they are not permanent. Stats for these summoned creatures
are listed immediately below the spell statistics. Spells in the
Divine school require no research. They are available to all
nations with priests. The Holy level of the spell corresponds
to the level of the priest needed to cast it. There are a few
national spells (such as those of Ulm and Jomon) that require
both skill in Holy magic and another magic path. In these
cases, the caster must meet both requirements.
Spells costing 100 fatigue or greater require one gem of the
primary path. For every full 100 additional fatigue, a spell
requires another gem. So for a spell costing 700 fatigue, like
Arcane Domination, 7 gems are required (plus several more
are probably advisable just for fatigue reduction).
Fire Spells
School Spell Name Path Fat Rng AoE Pre Dmg NoE Special
Evo 0 Fire Flies F1 20 30+ 0 -1 8 6 AP, NUW
Evo 1 Burning Hands F1 5 1 1 0 15+ 1 AP, NUW
Evo 1 Fire Darts F1 20 30+ 0 1 10 4+ AP, NUW
Alt 2 Burn F1 10 30 0 100 0 1 NUW
Alt 2 Resist Cold F1 10 0 0 0 0 1
Alt 4 Combustion F1 20 30 1 100 0 1 NUW
Alt 6 Blindness F1 20 20 0 100 0 1 MR
Conj 3 Summon Lesser Fire F1 100 1 0 0 0 1 NUW
Elemental
Fire Elemental x1 HP 25, Prot 0, MR 13, Mor 50, Str 12, Att 10, Def 8, Prec 5, Enc 0, CS 7, MM 16, Eth, Spi, Inanim,
Magic, Mind, NNEat, Aff Res 99, Heat pow 1, FR +50, CR -5, PR +25, SpSi, Heat 4, Fire Shield 10
AP dmg, Wpn: Flame Strike
Conj 5 Will o' the Wisp F1 100 0 0 0 0 2 NUW
Will o' the Wisp x2 HP 3, Prot 0, MR 12, Mor 50, Str 3, Att 20, Def 20, Prec 5, Enc 0, CS 22, MM 22, SS, Float, Eth,
Spi, Magic, Mind, NNEat, FR +15, PR +15, SpSi, Wpn: Flame Burst
Ench 1 Protection from Fire F1 5 0 0 0 0 1
Ench 3 Fire Shield F1 20 0 0 0 0 1 NUW
Thau 2 Bonds of Fire F1 20 20 0 3 0 1 NUW
Evo 1 Flame Bolt F2 20 45+ 1 2 15+ 1 AP, NUW
Evo 2 Fire Blast F2 20 7+ 3 0 15+ 1 AP, NUW
118
key meaning
Path Level in Magical Path(s) required for casting
F / A / W / E Fire / Air / Water / Earth
S / D / N / G aStral / Death / Nature / Glamour
B / H / ? Blood / Holy / Random path
Fat Fatigue
Rng Range
AoE Area of Effect
Pre Precision
Dmg Damage
NoE Number of Effects
AN Armor-Negating (ignores protection)
AP Armor-Piercing (uses half protection)
NUW Not castable underwater
UW Only castable underwater
MR Magic Resistance negates
MR- Magic Resistance negates easily (+4 to MR)
BF Entire battlefield affected
Mun Mundane (attack counts as non-magical)
BE Battlefield Enchantment (Remains active as long as
the caster is still present)
UndIm Undead are Immune
InanimIm Inanimates are Immune
MindIm Mindless are Immune
SpiIm Spiritforms are Immune

===== PAGE 118 =====
Evo 2 Sulphur Haze F2A1 20 30 4+ 0 104+ 1 AN, NUW
Evo 3 Fireball F2 20 35+ 1 1 16+ 1 AP, NUW
Evo 6 Flame Eruption F2 30 7+ 15 0 13+ 1 AP, NUW
Evo 8 Pillar of Fire F2 20 100 1 0 35+ 1 AP, NUW
Alt 3 Immolation F2 20 0 7 0 12+ 1 AP, NUW
Alt 3 Cold Resistance F2 20 15 1 0 0 1
Alt 7 Phoenix Pyre F2 20 0 0 0 0 1 NUW
Alt 8 Conflagration F2 20 30 10 100 0 1 NUW
Conj 3 Phoenix Power F2 20 0 0 0 0 1 NUW
Conj 4 Nest of Salamanders F2 100 0 0 0 0 10+ NUW
Salamander Asp x10+ HP 2, Prot 1, MR 12, Mor 50, Str 2, Att 12, Def 10, Prec 5, Enc 2, CS 6, MM 10, SS, Magic, Mind,
NNEat, Stealth 40, Heat pow 1, FR +25, Fire Shield 3 AP dmg, Wpn: Flame Poison Bite
Ench 2 Ignite Arrows F2 20 10 1 0 0 1 NUW
Ench 3 Lesser Flame Ward F2 20 15 1 0 0 1
Ench 5 Flame Ward F2 100 15 20+ 0 0 1
Thau 2 Battle Fury F2 20 10 1 2 0 1 AnimIm, MindIm
Thau 3 Rage F2 20 30 0 100 0 1 MR, MindIm
Thau 4 Furious Warriors F2 40 15 3+ 2 0 1 AnimIm, MindIm
Thau 8 Hydrophobia F2 100 30 5 100 0 1 MR, UndIm, InanimIm,
MindIm
Evo 2 Flare F3 50 45+ 1 1 22+ 1 AP, NUW
Evo 4 Fire Cloud F3A1 20 30 8+ 1 8 1 AP, NUW
Evo 5 Falling Fires F3 20 50 6+ -3 15 1 AP, NUW
Evo 5 Hidden Flame F3S1 20 40+ 1 0 25+ 1 AN, NUW
Alt 5 Cold Resistant Warriors F3 100 15 20+ 0 0 1
Alt 5 Incinerate F3 20 30 0 100 18+ 1 AN
Alt 5 Solar Eclipse F3S1 100 0 0 0 0 1 BE, NUW
Alt 6 Boil F3W1 20 30 1 100 9+ 1 AN, UW
Conj 5 Summon Fire Elemental F3 100 1 0 0 0 1 NUW
Fire Elemental x1 HP 70, Prot 0, MR 16, Mor 50, Str 18, Att 10, Def 8, Prec 5, Enc 0, CS 10, MM 16, Eth, Spi,
Inanim, Magic, Mind, NNEat, Aff Res 99, Heat pow 1, FR +50, CR -5, PR +25, SpSi, Heat 7, Fire
Shield 13 AP dmg, Wpn: Flame Strike
Ench 5 Flaming Arrows F3 100 15 20+ 0 0 1 NUW
Thau 4 Prison of Fire F3 30 30 3+ 2 0 1 NUW
Thau 5 Gift of the Furies F3 100 15 20+ 2 0 1 AnimIm, MindIm
Alt 8 Flameflesh Army F4 200 0 BF 0 0 1
Conj 7 Living Fire F4 200 1 0 0 0 4+ NUW
Fire Elemental x4+ HP 53, Prot 0, MR 15, Mor 50, Str 16, Att 10, Def 8, Prec 5, Enc 0, CS 9, MM 16, Eth, Spi, Inanim,
Magic, Mind, NNEat, Aff Res 99, Heat pow 1, FR +50, CR -5, PR +25, SpSi, Heat 6, Fire Shield 12
AP dmg, Wpn: Flame Strike
Ench 6 Heat from Hell F4 200 0 0 0 0 1 BE, NUW
Ench 7 Hail of Burning Embers F4 200 0 BF 0 0 1 NUW
Ench 8 Fire Fend F4 100 0 BF 0 0 1
Evo 7 Fire Storm F5 300 0 0 0 0 1 BE, NUW
Evo 9 Flame Storm F5 100 40+ 50 0 15+ 1 AP, NUW
Alt 8 All-consuming Pyre F5 100 0 40 0 20+ 1 AP, NUW
119